# The index

git uses the index to "stage" the next commit.

## What's in the index?

Differences between the working tree and the index:

    $ git diff

Differences between the index (staged changes) and the last commit:

    $ git diff --cached

    # I prefer the "staged" alias, it makes more sense:
    $ git diff --staged

The index allows you to carefully "prepare" or stage your next commit before
saving the changes to the repo. You can use 'git add' to add only certain
files to the next commit, but you can be even more granular:

    # asks whether to add each "edit block" or not:
    $ git add -p

    # edit the patch file before adding it to the stage:
    $ git add -e

If you want to unstage changes in a file:

    $ git checkout -- <path-to-file>

# Forked repos, remote branches

If someone has forked your repo and you need to merge or cherry-pick changes
from them:

    # add the remote repo and get its contents
    $ git remote add <pivot> git@github.com:collaborator/git-notes.git
    $ git fetch <pivot>

    # add a local branch to track the remote
    $ git branch <pivot-branch> <pivot>/<remote-branch>

    # ...and merge it:
    $ git checkout <integration-branch>
    $ git merge <pivot-branch>

    # or cherry-pick what you need:
    $ git checkout <integration-branch>
    $ git cherry-pick <commit-id>

# History

ONLY REWRITE HISTORY ON CHANGES THAT HAVE NOT BEEN SHARED. Do not use rebase
on commits that have been uploaded to a remote repo, or if there are
forks/clones of your local repo.

## Amend a commit

The "amend" operator resets the previous commit and applies the changes to the
index. If you want to change the commit message on the last commit:

    $ git commit --amend

If you want to add a change to the last commit:

    # edit ClassFoo.as
    $ git add ClassFoo.as
    $ git commit --amend

## Interactive rebase

Interactive rebase allows you to remove commits, edit the commit message,
squash 2 or more commits together, reorder commits, etc.

To interactively edit the last 10 commits:

    $ git rebase -i HEAD~10

# The reflog

The reflog is version control for your branch tips. With the reflog command
you can see and manipulate this history.

    $ git reflog

    # include branches and the stash
    $ git reflog --all

    # view commit information for a branch, including reflog reference
    $ git log --walk-reflogs

It can save you from a unintentional `git reset --hard HEAD~n`!

## The stash

The stash is a list of temporary branches/commits? that are not meant to be
distributed. When stashing a working tree the state of the tree is saved and
then it is reverted to HEAD.

Stashed changes are not related to any branch: you can stash in feature-branch
and apply the changes to master.

    # record the state of the current working tree
    $ git stash

    # even better...
    $ git stash save "working on foo, check bar setter, line 45"

    # if you want to keep your already staged changes:
    $ git stash save --keep-index

    # list the contents of the stash
    $ git stash list

    # view a diff of stash entry "n"
    $ git show -p @stash{n}

    # apply the most recent stashed change, and remove it from the list
    $ git stash pop

    # clear the stash list
    $ git stash clear

# Bisect

    $ git bisect start
    $ git bisect good <commit-id-for-last-known-good-commit>
    $ git bisect bad <commit-id-for-oldest-known-bad-commit>
    # git starts bisecting...
    # after running your tests you mark commits as either "good"
    $ git bisect good
    # or "bad"
    $ git bisect bad

    # when you have found the commit that caused the bug, return to the point
    # you were before running bisect
    $ git bisect reset

# Repo maintenance

To clean your working tree:

    # removes untracked files and directories:
    $ git clean -f -d

    # and files .gitignored!
    $ git clean -x
